---
layout: post
title: Week 5 Project Methodology & Study Procedure
---

In the fifth week, there is a shift on my research direction. Instead of building interactive persona, I was directed to propose methods for stereotype and biases detection, monitoring and correction in the interactive persona system. Please see revised project overview below for reference. Meanwhile, I watched the Building Persona coordiantion meeting this monday and got a better understanding on what NLP and UI team are working on. Therefore I have a better idea on how I can propose a framework for interactive persona system evaluation from stereotype and biases perspective.

PROJECT OVERVIEW
RESEARCH PROBLEM 
Personas serve as powerful tools for understanding and communicating user goals and behaviors within specific contexts in human-centered design used by product designers, development teams, as well as stakeholders. Traditional personas typically include a narrative and a photo. However, this static format relies on designers and development teams to empathize and role-play during the design phase. Creating interactive personas offers promising opportunities to provide real-time feedback based on user data and context throughout the design, development, and decision-making process.

Persona creation has traditionally relied on qualitative methods such as interviews, observations, and survey data. More recent methods use large datasets, including statistical data, clickstreams, and social media data. However, these approaches often did not address the sensitive user groups where empirical data is restricted due to practical and ethical reasons and large datasets are not readily available. 

The development of Large Language Models (LLMs) presents an opportunity to provide context in addition to the limited data available and create interactive persona to represent, engage, and empower sensitive user groups. Traditional and data-driven methods of persona creation often fall short for sensitive groups due to the lack of available data. This research aims to explore the use of LLMs to generate proxy personas for sensitive groups using limited data from online forums, where empirical data is restricted due to practical and ethical reasons.

However, LLMs often inherit and propagate societal biases present in their training data, leading to the creation of biased and stereotypical personas. These biases can negatively impact the design process, user experience, and overall inclusivity of the systems​​​​. 
MOTIVATION
When relying on LLMs for interactive persona creation and interaction, it is critical to address the ethical and practical implications of biases in the system. Biased personas can reinforce harmful stereotypes, decrease user trust, and result in suboptimal design decisions. Ensuring fair and accurate representations of all user groups is essential for creating inclusive and effective designs. This project aims to develop and evaluate methods for detecting, monitoring, and correcting biases in interactive persona systems, thereby enhancing their reliability and ethical use. 
RESEARCH GAP
While there is increasing numbers of research focusing on bias detection and mitigation in LLMs, few studies specifically address the unique challenges posed by interactive persona systems. There are a few studies that evaluated LLMs generated personas for diversity, authenticity, and stereotype, but the LLMs generated personas usually are in traditional persona format, including  a narrative and a photo. There are limited studies on interactive persona that maintain live interaction, engagement, and communication throughout the design process. Therefore, there is a gap for stereotype and bias evaluation of interactive persona. Existing methods often focus on general text generation or dialogue systems, leaving a gap in the context of interactive persona creation and interaction. Additionally, there is a lack of comprehensive frameworks that integrate detection, monitoring, and correction of biases and stereotypes across the entire lifecycle of persona development. 
RESEARCH QUESTIONS
Detection: What methods are effective for biases and stereotype detection?
Monitoring: How can biases and stereotypes in interactive persona systems be continuously monitored to ensure fair and accurate representations?
Correction: When biases and stereotypes are detected, how can they be corrected in the system or during real-time interaction? How effective are the correction methods?
Evaluation: How to evaluate the effectiveness of bias detection, monitoring, and correction methods in terms of improving the safety, authenticity, diversity, and inclusivity of interactive personas?
PURPOSE OF PROJECT / STUDY
The goal of this project is to develop a comprehensive framework for detecting, monitoring, and correcting biases and stereotypes in interactive persona systems. By addressing the research questions above, the project aims to:
Ethical: Ensure that the interactive persona system does not create harmful stereotypes or biases.
User Trust: Ensure the credibility of the interactive persona system by providing fair representations of diverse user groups.
Inclusivity: Facilitate better design decisions that consider the needs and experiences of all user groups, leading to more inclusive and effective products.

PROJECT SCOPE
WITHIN SCOPE
The project will involve collaboration with the Natural Language Processing (NLP) team and Interactive Persona System UI design team for system evaluation. The project will focus on evaluating the outputs generated by the NLP team and developing methods to correct any identified biases. The project would propose system improvements for detection, monitoring, and correction of biases and stereotypes. The project will involve building an extension to the interface built by UI design team.
OUTSIDE OF SCOPE
The project does not involve data collection, developing and building the backend, or the design of the UI of interactive persona system. 



Slides: [Week 5 - Design Framework Slides](/files/Week5-DesignFramework.pdf)

<embed src="/files/Week5-DesignFramework.pdf" width="600" height="400" type="application/pdf">
